>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 4:
WORLD LEADERS MEET IN CHINA FOR
THE FIRST DAY OF THE G-20
SUMMIT.
POPE FRANCIS BESTOWS THE
CATHOLIC CHURCH'S HIGHEST
HONOR-- SAINTHOOD-- ON MOTHER
TERESA.
AND, THE RESURGENCE OF
BEEKEEPING IN AMERICA'S CITIES.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND LEADERS OF
THE WORLD'S LEADING ECONOMIC
POWERS, HAVE WOUND UP THE FIRST
DAY OF THE "GROUP OF 20" SUMMIT
IN CHINA.
THIS WILL BE OBAMA'S LAST AS
PRESIDENT.
BEFORE A BANQUET HOSTED BY
CHINA'S PRESIDENT XI JINPING,
OBAMA HAD A FULL SCHEDULE OF
DISCUSSIONS ON ISSUES OF VITAL
INTEREST TO THE UNITED STATES.
IN HIS FIRST MEETING WITH
TURKEY'S PRESIDENT, RECEP
ERDOGAN, SINCE A FAILED JULY
MILITARY COUP, THE PRESIDENT
ALLUDED TO TURKEY'S DEMAND THAT
THE U.S. EXTRADITE A
PENNSYLVANIA-BASED CLERIC
ERDOGAN ACCUSES OF PLOTTING THE
COUP.
>> I'VE ASSURED HIM THAT OUR
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AND MY
NATIONAL SECURITY TEAM WILL
CONTINUE TO COOPERATE WITH
TURKISH AUTHORITIES TO DETERMINE
HOW WE CAN MAKE SURE THAT THOSE
WHO CARRIED OUT THESE ACTIVITIES
ARE BROUGHT TO JUSTICE.
>> AGAINST THIS TERRORIST,
BEFORE THE COUP ATTEMPT, WE HAD
PUT TOGETHER SOME DOCUMENTATION,
AMASSED SOME EVIDENCE, WHICH WE
HAVE SUBMITTED TO THE UNITED
STATES. AND THE POST ATTEMPTED-
COUP DOCUMENTATION AND EVIDENCE
THEREIN WILL BE AMASSED.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ALSO SAID TURKEY MUST PREVENT
THE ISLAMIC STATE FROM SNEAKING
RECRUITS THROUGH TURKEY INTO
SYRIA TURKEY'S STATE-RUN MEDIA
REPORTS ITS TROOPS HAVE SEALED
OFF THE LAST STRIP OF ISIS-
CONTROLLED TERRITORY ALONG ITS
BORDER WITH SYRIA.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY IS
AT THE SUMMIT LEADING TALKS WITH
RUSSIA TO BROKER A CEASEFIRE
BETWEEN THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
AND REBELS.
>> AND WE'VE AGREED TO MEET
TOMORROW MORNING AND SEE WHETHER
OR NOT IT IS POSSIBLE TO BRIDGE
THE GAP, COME TO CONCLUSION ON
THOSE COUPLE OF ISSUES.
>> Sreenivasan: MEETING WITH
CHINA'S PRESIDENT XI, MISTER
OBAMA SAID HE URGED HIM TO HONOR
AN INTERNATIONAL TREATY FOR
RESOLVING MARITIME DISPUTES IN
THE SOUTH CHINA SEA...WHERE
CHINA HAS BEEN EXPANDING ITS
MILITARY PRESENCE.
XI SAID CHINA IS DETERMINED TO
RESOLVE THE DISPUTES PEACEFULLY
AND ASKED THE U-S TO PLAY A,
QUOTE, "CONSTRUCTIVE ROLE."
OBAMA ALSO MET FOR THE FIRST
TIME WITH BRITAIN'S NEW PRIME
MINISTER, THERESA MAY.
WHILE HE STOOD BY HIS OPPOSITION
TO THE BRITISH VOTE TO EXIT THE
EUROPEAN UNION, SHE SAID THERE
WILL BE NO SECOND REFERENDUM OR
TURNING BACK.
POPE FRANCIS TODAY DECLARED
MOTHER TERESA A SAINT OF THE
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
ADDRESSING 120,000 PEOPLE IN ST.
PETER'S SQUARE, FRANCIS SAID THE
ALBANIAN NUN WHO FOUNDED THE"
MISSIONARIES OF CHARITY" ORDER
IN 1950 WAS A "DISPENSER OF
DIVINE MERCY."
FRANCIS SAID SHE SHAMED WORLD
LEADERS, IN HIS WORDS, "FOR THE
CRIMES OF POVERTY THEY
THEMSELVES CREATED."
SAINT TERESA, WHO DIED IN 1997,
AT THE AGE OF 87, WAS AWARDED
THE NOBEL PEACE PRIZE FOR HER
LIFETIME OF WORK CARING FOR THE
SICK AND UNWANTED IN THE SLUMS
OF THE INDIAN CITY OF CALCUTTA.
BUT SHE WAS NOT WITHOUT HER
CRITICS.
FOR MORE ON HER LEGACY AND
CANONIZATION, "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" FRANCIS ROCCA JOINS ME
VIA SKYPE FROM VATICAN CITY.
THIS IS ACTUALLY AN ACCELERATED
PROCESS EVEN AFTER SHE DIED SHE
WAS SO WELL LIKED THAT USUALLY
THE FIVE YEARS THAT THEY HAVE TO
WAIT TO SORT OF SUBMIT THE NAME
THAT WAS EVEN SHORTENED.
>> RIGHT RIGHT, JOHN PALL II CUT
THAT SHORT AFTER ABOUT 18 MONTHS
SAID LET'S JUST MOVE AHEAD WITH
IT.
SHE WAS BEATIFIED WHICH IS THE
PENULTIMATE STAGE IN 2003.
THIS PART WASN'T ACCELERATED
PARTICULARLY, BUT YEAH, THE NET
EFFECT IS THAT IT'S LESS THAN 20
YEARS SINCE SHE DIED.
>> THIS IS SOMEONE IN RECENT
HISTORY THAT A HUGE AMOUNT OF
PEOPLE IN THE WORLD KNOW ABOUT.
>> IT ALMOST SEEMED SUPERFLUOUS
SHE WAS HAILED AS A SAINT IN
HER LIFE BY MANY PEOPLE AND
THERE WAS ALREADY A GLOBAL
DEVOTION TO HER.
IT'S ALMOST KIND OF AN
AFTERTHOUGHT FOR THE POPE TO
ACTUALLY PRONOUNCE THE WORDS.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE HAVE
BEEN CRITICS IN THE PAST OF
MOTHER TERESA, SAYING SHE WAS
MORE INTO THE BRAND OF MOTHER
TERESA THAN ACTUALLY DOING WORK
THE GROUND.
>> THERE HAVE BEEN CRITICISMS
AND THEY PERSIST AND COME UP AT
THIS TIME THAT THE SISTERS
WEREN'T TRAINED WELL ENOUGH THAT
THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE HIGHEST
STANDARDS.
THERE MAY HAVE BEEN -- I THINK
SHE TRIED TO USE HER GLOBAL
CELEBRITY VERY EFFECTIVELY TO
GET HER ATTENTION TO GET
RESOURCES.
SHE WASN'T TRYING ORUN
HOSPITALS, THAT WAS FOR OTHERS
IN THE CHURCH.
SHE WANTED TO GET EMERGENCY CARE
TO THE POOREST OF THE POOR.
BUT IT WAS CLEAR MOST PEOPLE
THOUGHT SHE WAS A GREAT WOMAN.
>> WHAT ARE THE RIPPLES OF THIS?
CELEBRATORY, IN PARTS OF INDIA
AND OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
>> SHE WILL BE ENSHRINED.
MORE CHURCHES NAMED AFTER HER
HERETOFORE THAT HAS BEEN PRETTY
LIMITED SINCE SHE WASN'T A SAINT
YET, THEY PUT A CAP ON THAT BUT
CATHOLIC CHURCHES ALL OVER THE
WORLD WILL BE NAMED AFTER HER
AND SCHOOLS AND THAT KIND OF
THING.
THIS EMBEDS HER LEGACY I SUPPOSE
FOR OTHER FAITHS.
THERE WAS AN ASPECT OF HER, SHE
HAS BEEN ACCUSED BY NO. INDIA OF
TRYING IS CHRISTIANIZE INDIA,
SHE HAD GOOD RELATIONSHIPS WITH
OTHERS OF OTHER FAITHS AND THAT
HAS SECURED HER LEGACY.
>> FRANCIS
>> Sreenivasan: IF THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION WERE
TODAY, ACCORDING TO AN
ASSOCIATED PRESS ANALYSIS OF
STATEWIDE POLLS, HILLARY CLINTON
WOULD BEGIN ONLY ONE ELECTORAL
VOTE SHY OF THE 270 NEEDED TO
WIN.
THE 21 BLUES STATES AND
WASHINGTON D.C.-- THOSE RATED
SOLID OR LEANING DEMOCRATIC--
CARRY 269 ELECTORAL VOTES.
THE 23 RED STATES-- THOSE RATED
SOLID OR LEANING REPUBLICAN FOR
DONALD TRUMP-- CARRY 191
ELECTORAL VOTES.
THE SIX STATES RATED "TOSS-UPS"
ARE: FLORIDA, OHIO, NORTH
CAROLINA, NEVADA, IOWA, AND NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
NEITHER CLINTON NOR TRUMP HAD
ANY PUBLIC CAMPAIGN EVENTS
TODAY, BUT THEIR RUNNING MATES
EACH COMPARED THE OTHER PARTY'S
CANDIDATE TO THE ONE AMERICAN
PRESIDENT WHO RESIGNED FROM
OFFICE.
REPUBLICAN VICE PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINEE MIKE PENCE REFERRED TO
THE NEWLY RELEASED FBI NOTES
ABOUT CLINTON'S EMAIL HABITS AS
SECRETARY OF STATE.
>> IT'S JUST MORE EVIDENCE, THAT
HILLARY CLINTON IS THE MOST
DISHONEST CANDIDATE FOR
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
SINCE RICHARD NIXON.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATIC VICE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE TIM KAINE
LIKENED NIXON'S WATERGATE BREAK-
IN TO TRUMP'S CALL FOR HACKERS
TO HIT THE EMAIL SERVERS OF
CLINTON AND THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
>> HE HAS OPENLY ENCOURAGED
RUSSIA TO ENGAGE IN CYBER
HACKING TO TRY TO FIND MORE
EMAILS OR MATERIALS, AND WE KNOW
THAT THIS CYBER ATTACK ON THE
DNC WAS LIKELY DONE BY RUSSIA. A
PRESIDENT WAS IMPEACHED AND HAD
TO RESIGN OVER AN ATTACK ON THE
DNC DURING A PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION IN 1972."
STORM SYSTEM HERMINE CONTINUES
TO SPOIL THIS HOLIDAY WEEKEND
FOR MANY ALONG THE EASTERN
SEABOARD.
EVEN AS THE STORM MOVED AWAY
FROM THE COAST, WINDS TOPPED 70
MILES AN HOUR, CHURNING UP
DANGEROUS SURF ALONG BEACHES
FROM NORTH CAROLINA TO NEW
JERSEY.
RESIDENTS IN THE NORFOLK,
VIRGINIA, AREA COPED WITH
FLOODED STREETS FOLLOWING EIGHT
FOOT WAVES AND A FOUR FOOT STORM
SURGE.
HERMINE HAS CAUSED TWO DEATHS
AND DOWNED POWER LINES FOR
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF HOMES.
FOR THE PAST DECADE, MEXICO'S
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN WAGING WAR
AGAINST ILLEGAL DRUG CARTELS
WHO ARE ALSO FIGHTING EACH OTHER
FOR CONTROL OF TERRITORY AND THE
U.S./MEXICO DRUG TRADE.
THE VIOLENCE HAS LED TO AN
ESTIMATED 80,000 MEXICANS KILLED
AND 27,000 KIDNAPPED.
A NEW A DOCUMENTARY PREMIERING
THIS MONTH ON THE PBS PROGRAM
"POV" TAKES A CLOSER LOOK AT THE
ROOT CAUSES THE VIOLENCE AND ITS
IMPACT.
THE FILM IS CALLED "KINGDOM OF
SHADOWS," AND NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S
IVETTE FELICIANO SAT DOWN WITH
THE DIRECTOR, BERNARDO RUIZ.
>> Reporter: FILMMAKER BERNARDO
RUIZ, A DUAL MEXICAN AND
AMERICAN CITIZEN, BELIEVES THE
LOSS OF LIFE DUE TO RAMPANT
VIOLENCE IN MEXICO IS NOT TOP OF
MIND FOR MOST AMERICANS.
THROUGH HIS DOCUMENTARY, KINGDOM
OF SHADOWS, HE WANTED TO CHANGE
THAT.
RUIZ BEGINS THE FILM WITH A
NEWSCASTER ANNOUNCING THE
DISCOVERY OF 49 MUTILATED
BODIES, FOLLOWED BY A MASS GRAVE
HOLDING 6,000 DRUG WAR VICTIMS.
WHY DID YOU DECIDE TO START YOUR
FILM THAT WAY?
>> WHAT I WANTED TO DO IN THE
FILM IS GIVE THE VIEWER THE
SENSE OF WHAT IT'S LIKE TO BE IN
A PLACE WHERE VIOLENCE OR THESE
REPORTS THAT ARE REALLY
HORRIFIC, THAT THEY'RE JUST PART
OF THE DAILY TEXTURE, THEY'RE
KIND OF IN THE BACKGROUND OF
YOUR DAILY LIFE.
AND UNFORTUNATELY THOSE OF US
WHO WORK IN MEDIA NEWS MEDIA, WE
KNOW THAT IN ORDER TO KIND OF
CONVINCE AN EXECUTIVE TO TELL A
STORY, THERE NEEDS TO BE A NEWS
PEG.
SO THESE KIND OF ONGOING
INTRACTABLE STORIES, THEY'RE
REALLY HARD FOR US TO TELL.
I'VE OFTEN THOUGHT THAT WHEN YOU
ARE TRYING TO EXAMINE THE
U.S./MEXICO DRUG WAR, IT'S A
LITTLE BIT LIKE THE ACT OF
STARING AT THE SUN.
YOU CAN'T DO IT FOR VERY LONG.
AND ROOTING OUT THE STORIES OF
CORRUPTION BETWEEN PUBLIC
OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZED CRIME,
IT'S POTENTIALLY DEADLY WORK.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS THE CAUSE
OF THE VIOLENCE?
IS IT DRUG CARTELS AT WAR OVER
TURF?
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THE
FILM TOUCHES ON IS HOW VIOLENCE
IN MEXICO RELATED TO THE ILLICIT
DRUG TRADE, HOW IT CHANGED FROM
WHAT WAS ARGUABLY A KIND OF
FAMILY MODEL, A KIND OF
CONSOLIDATED MODEL WHERE THERE
WERE FEWER GROUPS, IT WAS MORE
OF A KIND OF TOP-DOWN
AUTHORITARIAN KIND OF ORGANIZED
CRIME SYSTEM, HOW IT CHANGED
FROM THAT KIND OF CONSOLIDATED
MODEL TO THIS SPLINTERED AND
THIS MUCH MORE VIOLENT, AND IN
SOME WAYS MUCH MORE LETHAL
MODEL.
>> Reporter: YOU TALK A LOT
ABOUT THE ROLE OF THE ZETAS
CARTEL.
HOW DID THEY CHANGE THE FACE OF
THE VIOLENCE, THE TYPE OF
VIOLENCE WE IN MEXICO TODAY?
>> WHAT THE ZETAS REPRESENT IS
THAT BREAK FROM THE KIND OF OLD
TOP-DOWN MODEL.
IT WAS MORE ABOUT BLOOD TIES,
THESE KIND OF DEEP NETWORKS OF
TRUST, PEOPLE WHO'D GROWN UP
TOGETHER.
WHEREAS WITH THE ZETAS, THESE
WERE MEN THAT WERE TRAINED BY
THE MILITARY.
SO THESE WERE HIGHLY
PROFESSIONAL, HIGHLY ORGANIZED
KILLERS WITH A VERY CLEAR
HIERARCHICAL SYSTEM.
WE ACTUALLY OBTAINED AN
INTERVIEW WITH A LOW-RANKING
ZETAS CARTEL MEMBER WHO
DESCRIBES, IN DETAIL, HOW BODIES
ARE DOUSED IN DIESEL AND BURNED.
>> (translated): SOMETIMES
THEY ARE INNOCENT PEOPLE.
PEOPLE THAT HAVE NOTHING TO DO
WITH IT.
>> TO ME, THE KIND OF COLD
BANALITY OF THAT WAS SURPRISING.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO
INTERVIEWS WITH MEXICAN
FORENSICS INVESTIGATORS AND
HUMAN RIGHTS ADVOCATES, RUIZ
FOLLOWS A U.S. DRUG ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER WHO WAS BORN TO
UNDOCUMENTED MEXICAN PARENTS IN
A DRUG-RAVAGED TEXAS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> IT TOOK A LOT FOR ME TO JOIN
THE BORDER PATROL.
IT TOOK A LOT FOR ME TO TELL MY
DAD.
>> Reporter: RUIZ SPOKE TO A
WHITE-AMERICAN RANCHER WHO USED
TO SMUGGLE DRUGS INTO THE U.S.
FROM MEXICO.
>> THERE WAS A MULTINATIONAL,
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS.
I WAS JUST A COG IN THE WHEEL.
>> Reporter: HE ALSO INTERVIEWS
AN ACTIVIST NUN ADVOCATING FOR
FAMILIES OF THE PEOPLE KIDNAPPED
OR "DISAPPEARED" BY DRUG
CARTELS, AND SOMETIMES BY
MEXICAN SOLDIERS AND POLICE
OFFICERS WHO ARE OFTEN IN
COLLUSION WITH THE GANGS.
>> THROUGH HER, I THINK WE GET A
SENSE OF THE HAVOC, THE DAMAGE
THAT'S BEEN WREAKED ON THIS
COMMUNITY IN NORTHERN MEXICO.
BUT IT COULD BE A STAND-IN FOR
ALMOST ANY REGION IN MEXICO.
THE LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE GONE MISSING OR BEEN
DISAPPEARED AS A RESULT OF THIS
DRUG WAR.
I THINK THERE ARE VERY HIGH
PROFILE CASES THAT CONTINUE TO
DEMONSTRATE THAT BOTH THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND MANY
STATES THROUGHOUT MEXICO ARE
UNABLE TO PROVIDE KIND OF BASIC
SECURITY FOR THEIR CITIZENS.
>> Reporter: SPEAKING OF THE
DECISIONS OF THE POWERFUL, CAN
YOU BRIEFLY TALK ABOUT WHAT'S
BEEN HAPPENING IN MEXICO IN
RECENT YEARS IN TERMS OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S EITHER ESCALATING
THE VIOLENCE OR CRACKING DOWN ON
CARTELS?
>> I THINK IN TERMS OF KIND OF
TAKING THE TEMPERATURE OF
SECURITY OF MEXICO AND HOW
THINGS HAVE CHANGED OVER THE
LAST FEW YEARS, IT REALLY
DEPENDS WHO YOU TALK TO.
THERE ARE BUBBLES IN MEXICO,
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE REALLY
PROTECTED FROM, INURED FROM THE
VIOLENCE, AND THEN THERE ARE
OTHERS WHO ARE CONFRONTING IT IN
VERY DIRECT WAYS.
IF YOU SPENT ANY TIME IN MEXICO
AND YOU FOLLOW THE PROTEST
MOVEMENTS, ONE OF THE CHANTS
YOU'LL OFTEN HEAR IS
"NARCOESTADO," THE NARCO-STATE,
THAT UNHOLY MIX OF ORGANIZED
CRIME AND POLITICAL BUREAUCRACY,
THOSE TWO THINGS BEING
INTERWOVEN.
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE, IN ESSENCE
WHAT YOU HAVE IN MEXICO IS A
KIND OF PERFECT STORM.
YOU HAVE TERRIBLE ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY.
YOU HAVE A VERY BROKEN JUDICIAL
SYSTEM, AND YOU ALSO HAVE THE
LARGEST MARKET FOR ILLICIT
NARCOTICS JUST NORTH OF THE
BORDER.
>> Reporter: WHAT ASPECTS OF THE
VIOLENCE AND OF THIS CONFLICT DO
YOU THINK ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN THE
FILM THAT ARE OFTEN
MISUNDERSTOOD BY PEOPLE?
>> I'M REALLY BAFFLED BY WHY
THIS CONFLICT THAT HAS CLAIMED
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF LIVES, WHY
IT'S BECOME FODDER FOR
ENTERTAINMENT.
YOU KNOW NETFLIX HAS NARCOS,
ABOUT A YEAR AGO SICARIO CAME
OUT.
THERE'S SO MUCH COMMERCIAL
MEDIA.
WHILE I APPRECIATE THE
EXAMINATION OF THAT TOPIC, I DO
FEEL LIKE IT'S REALLY BEEN
EXPLOITED AND SENSATIONALIZED
AND USED IN A WAY THAT REALLY
KIND OF REMOVES IT OF ITS
POLITICAL CONTEXT.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY
THAT?
>> I HAD THIS ONE MOMENT IN
PRODUCTION WHERE I WAS TRAVELING
EARLY ONE MORNING WITH A SOUND
MIXER FROM THE CITY OF
MONTERREY.
HE TOLD ME, HE SAID, "I CAN'T
WATCH BREAKING BAD."
AND I SAID, WELL WHAT DO YOU
MEAN, AND HE SAID, "I CAN'T
WATCH IT BECAUSE THERE HAVE BEEN
A FEW MORNINGS WHEN I GET UP TO
GO TO WORK, AND I WILL HAVE TO
DRIVE UNDER A BRIDGE WHERE
THERE'S A BODY HANGING FROM A
BRIDGE.
OR I'LL HAVE TO DRIVE ANOTHER
WAY BECAUSE THERE WERE BODIES IN
THE HIGHWAY."
AND HE SAID, "TO ME, IT'S NOT
ENTERTAINMENT.
TO ME IT'S NOT FUN. THIS IS MY
DAY-TO-DAY.
I'M JUST TRYING TO LIVE MY
LIFE."
AND I THINK THAT MOMENT FOR ME
REALLY ENCAPSULATES WHAT'S WRONG
WITH SO MUCH OF THAT KIND OF
BIG, COMMERCIAL MEDIA
EXPLOITATION, NO MATTER HOW
WELL-CRAFTED, NO MATTER HOW
WELL-RESEARCHED, NO MATTER HOW
ENTERTAINING IT IS.
I STILL THINK THERE'S A HUGE
DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION WHEN IT
COMES TO THIS PAIN.
SO WHAT THIS FILM SEEKS TO DO IN
A KIND OF QUIET WAY IS JUST SHOW
THE VERY REAL HUMAN COST OF THIS
WAR.
>> Reporter: ARE THERE ANY
MOMENTS OF HOPE?
>> THE FAMILIES OF THE
DISAPPEARED HAVE BEEN THROUGH
THE WORST TRAUMA IMAGINABLE, AND
YET THEY'RE STILL ON THEIR FEET,
AND THEY HAVE THIS INCREDIBLE
SENSE OF DIGNITY.
AND THEY CONTINUE TO PUSH FOR
JUSTICE IN A PLACE WHERE JUSTICE
IS REALLY BROKEN.
AND I THINK THERE'S SOMETHING IN
THEIR FACES, IN THE EXPRESSION
OF THEIR FACES THAT CONVEYS THAT
SENSE OF PAIN AND ALSO DIGNITY.
AND I THINK COMMUNITIES ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE U.S./MEXICO BORDER
CONTINUE TO BE EXTREMELY
RESILIENT IN THE FACE OF TRAUMA.
I THINK IF THERE'S ANY HOPE,
IT'S IN THESE COMMUNITIES
PARTICIPATING IN THE KIND OF
CRAFTING OF NEW LEGISLATION, AND
KIND OF RESHAPING THE PUBLIC
DIALOGUE AROUND THIS THING THAT
WE CALL THE DRUG WAR.
>> Sreenivasan: BESIDES
PRODUCING HONEY, BEES PLAY A
CRITICAL PART IN AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION.
ROUGHLY ONE-THIRD OF WHAT WE EAT
DEPENDS ON HONEYBEES FOR
POLLINATION, AND AS BEES COLLECT
POLLEN FOR FOOD, THEY SPREAD IT
FROM ONE FLOWER TO ANOTHER,
WHICH HELPS THOSE PLANTS
REPRODUCE.
ACCORDING TO THE FEDERAL
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, THERE
ARE AROUND 3 MILLION BEE
COLONIES IN THE U.S., AND WHILE
THAT'S A DROP FROM THE HISTORIC
HIGHS DECADES AGO, A RESURGENCE
IN BEEKEEPING-- EVEN IN CITIES--
IS HELPING TO REVERSE THE TREND.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE ROOF OF
THE SOFITEL HOTEL IN DOWNTOWN
PHILADELPHIA, 14 FLOORS ABOVE
THE STREET, DON SHUMP MANAGES
FOUR HIVES OF HONEY BEES.
>> WE ACTUALLY TOOK SOME FRAMES
OUT OF THIS ONE.
>> Sreenivasan: EACH ONE
CONTAINS AS MANY AS 100,000
BEES.
>> USUALLY PEOPLE GO, ' YOU'RE
DOING WHAT ON THE ROOF IN
PHILADELPHIA AND HOW HIGH?
AND THE CONVERSATION GOES FROM
THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHUMP BEGAN
BEEKEEPING AS A HOBBY, THEN FIVE
YEARS AGO, HE QUIT HIS JOB AS A
WEB DEVELOPER AND BECAME A
BEEKEEPER FULL TIME.
HE STARTED THE PHILADELPHIA BEE
COMPANY, AND NOW HANDLES ABOUT
65 BEEHIVES IN 15 LOCATIONS
AROUND THE CITY.
HIS BEES PRODUCED MORE THAN
1,000 POUNDS OF HONEY LAST YEAR,
AN UNUSUAL AGRICULTURAL BOUNTY
FOR AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT.
>> BEING ABLE TO KEEP BEES IN AN
URBAN SETTING ALLOWS US TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THE BLIGHT WE HAVE
DOWNTOWN.
WE HAVE 40,000 ABANDONED LOTS IN
THE CITY.
BEES REALLY LOVE THE WEEDS THAT
WE HAVE.
IT GIVES US REALLY INTERESTING
AND COMPLEX HONEYS.
WHEN YOU BRING BEES DOWNTOWN TO
AN URBAN SETTING, YOU'RE GETTING
ALL KINDS OF DIFFERENT PLANTS.
PHILADELPHIA IN PARTICULAR HAS A
COUPLE HUNDRED YEARS OF
BOTANICAL AWESOMENESS GOING ON.
>> Sreenivasan: ABOUT A MILE AND
A HALF EAST OF THE HOTEL, SHUMP
MANAGES EIGHT MORE HIVES ON THE
ROOF OF SHANE CONFECTIONERY, ONE
OF THE OLDEST CANDY STORES IN
THE COUNTRY.
>> PEOPLE DON'T KNOW THERE ARE
ANY HIVES HERE UNTIL I SHOW UP
WITH A SMOKER AND VEIL, AND
PEOPLE GO WHERE ARE THE BEES?
AND I GO...
>> Sreenivasan: SOME OF THE
HONEY THESE BEES PRODUCE WILL GO
ON SALE DOWNSTAIRS IN THE CANDY
STORE.
SOME WILL MAKE ITS WAY INTO"
HONEYCOMB" ICE CREAM AT THE
FRANKLIN FOUNTAIN NEXT DOOR.
>> THIS ONE IS GOING TO BE FULL
OF HONEY.
THAT'S BEAUTIFUL.
>> Sreenivasan: HONEYBEES ARE
MUCH MORE BENIGN THAN WASPS AND
OTHER STINGING INSECTS, BUT IT
DOESN'T STOP AN OCCASIONAL
STING.
>> YOU CAN ACTUALLY SEE IT
TWITCH AND BURROW.
WHAT YOU DO IS TAKE YOUR
FINGERNAIL AND PULL IT OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: SHUMP IS PART OF
A GROWING MOVEMENT OF URBAN
BEEKEEPERS AROUND THE COUNTRY.
PHILADELPHIA NOW HAS ABOUT 400
REGISTERED BEE COLONIES AND 75
BEEKEEPERS.
CITIES THAT UNTIL RECENTLY
RESTRICTED BEEKEEPING-- LIKE
WASHINGTON D.C., NEW YORK, AND
LOS ANGELES-- HAVE LIFTED THOSE
RESTRICTIONS.
THE MOVEMENT IS BEING EMBRACED
BECAUSE THE NUMBER OF BEE
COLONIES IN THE U.S. HAD DROPPED
DRAMATICALLY IN RECENT DECADES.
>> IN THE 1940S, WE HAD FIVE
MILLION BEEHIVES IN THE UNITED
STATES.
NOW WE'RE ABOUT HALF THAT.
WE'RE JUST STARTING TO SEE A
RESURGENCE IN AN INTEREST IN
BEEKEEPING.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT RESURGENCE
HAS LED TO AN ESTIMATED 120,000
BACKYARD BEEKEEPERS IN THE U.S.,
LIKE SUZANNE MATLOCK.
>> THIS IS WHERE THE QUEEN IS
BUILDING A COLONY.
>> Sreenivasan: MATLOCK BEGAN
KEEPING HIVES ON THE FRONT LAWN
OF HER PHILADELPHIA HOME SEVEN
YEARS AGO.
SHE BECAME INTERESTED IN
BEEKEEPING AFTER HEARING ABOUT
COLONY COLLAPSE DISORDER, THE
SUDDEN LOSS OF 30 TO 90% OF BEE
COLONIES, WHICH CAN LEAD TO A
SHORTAGE OF BEES NEEDED TO
POLLINATE CROPS.
>> MAYBE IT'D MAKE A TINY LITTLE
DIFFERENCE IF EACH PERSON WOULD
KEEP A HIVE OF BEES, JUST LIKE
EACH PERSON COMPOSTS OR
RECYCLES.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH A
BACKGROUND IN BIOLOGY AND
CHEMISTRY, MATLOCK IS ALSO
WORKING TO PROLONG THE LIFE OF
BEES, RAISING QUEEN BEES THAT
CAN SURVIVE COLD NORTHEAST
WINTERS.
>> MY GOAL IS TO COME UP WITH
SOME GREAT GENETIC LIVESTOCK
THAT SURVIVES PENNSYLVANIA
WINTERS AND IS NICE AND EASY TO
WORK WITH.
IF YOU CAN GET A LITTLE EXTRA
HONEY OUT OF THEM, THAT'S GOOD
TOO.
>> Sreenivasan: SEVERAL TIMES A
YEAR, MATLOCK HARVESTS THE HONEY
THAT HER BEES PRODUCE.
>> SLICE DOWN WITH A KNIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE REMOVES THE
WAX CAPS TO GET TO THE HONEY,
AND THEN USES A HAND-POWERED
CENTRIFUGE TO EXTRACT IT.
>> SPIN AS FAST AS YOU CAN...
>> Sreenivasan: SHE SAYS THE
TASTE CHANGES WITH THE SEASONS.
>> FALL HONEY IS MUCH DARKER
THAN THE SPRING HONEY.
>> Sreenivasan: HOBBYISTS AND
PART-TIMER BEEKEEPERS LIKE
MATLOCK NOW ACCOUNT FOR 40% OF
U.S. HONEY PRODUCTION.
>> LOOK AT HOW MUCH WE GOT JUST
FROM FOUR FRAMES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MATLOCK,
THOUGH, TENDING TO HER HIVES IS
SIMPLY THERAPEUTIC.
>> ONCE I GOT OVER AN INITIAL
FEAR OF THE BEES WHEN I WAS
ACTUALLY IN THE HIVE, I CAME TO
THIS POINT WHERE I FELT SO
SERENE.
EVERY TIME I'M WORKING IN THE
BEEHIVE, TIME PASSES REALLY
QUICKLY.
LEARN SOME OF THE MOST
SURPRISING FACTS ABOUT BEES.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY FOR
AIMING HIS CAMERA LENS AT
EUROPE'S MIGRANT AND REFUGEE
CRISIS, PHOTOGRAPHER ARIS
MESSINIS HAS WON THE VISA
D'OR FOR NEWS AWARD.
HIS PHOTOS DOCUMENTED THOUSANDS
OF REFUGEES FROM SYRIA AND
BEYOND, CROSSING THE AEGEAN
SEA ON FLIMSY RAFTS.
HE TRIED TO BE AS CLOSE TO THE
PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE TO FEEL WHAT
THEY WERE SUFFERING.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW, A
LOOK AT THE POST LABOR DAY
SPRINT TO ELECTION DAY WITH OUR
POLITICS MONDAY TEAM.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING, HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.